increasingly in Gaza there is nowhere
left for Palestinians to run from north
to south Israeli air strikes have
repeatedly hit refugee camps residential
buildings before the war these were
gaza's main population centers home to
more than 2.3 million people under an
Israeli Land Air and sea blockade on
October 13th the Israeli military
ordered more than 1 million people in
the north to move South saying it was
for their
safety and nearly 2 months of War about
1.8 million Palestinians have been
uprooted from their homes most of them
made the journey to the South the UN
says
98,000 displaced people are Sheltering
in 99 facilities in central Gaza can
yunas and ruer and now after a weekl
long ceasefire Israel has expanded its
offensive hitting crowded neighborhoods
in parts of Southern Gaza its Army has
dropped leaflets calling Kan Yuna City a
dangerous combat zone leaving displaced
and distraught Palestinians with nowhere
left to go we're joined Now by Chris
Gunners he is a former spokesperson for
anra that is the un's Palestinian Agency
for refugees he's also founder of the
Myanmar accountability project a
humanitarian organization and he's
joining us live from London thank you
very much for your time Mr Gunners you
know Gaza very well when you hear that
four and five people have been forced to
leave their homes in Gaza one point 8
million people those are the new UN
numbers out today can you tell us what
that means for people
there it means that the people of Gaza
are staring into the humanitarian abyss
and to be clear this is a humanitarian
abyss of choice unra the main UN agency
charged with bringing relief houses they
they do um schools hospitals um that
organization is frankly literally
Running on Empty there's almost no fuel
for unra so their operation is entirely
or nearly shut down and that means that
for the people of Gaza their Lifeline
has gone and what that means for me as
someone who works on accountability in
relation to Myanmar not not Israel
Palestine it means there has to be
accountability so what we're seeing is
the potential crimes being committed
International crimes
so the withholding of international Aid
look at article 7 and 8 of the Rome
statute which defines war crimes and
crimes against humanity deliberate
killing that's another crime defined by
the um by the Rome statute and what I
say is and I include Hamas in this I
would like to see all of the crimes
being committed investigated and already
there is an investigation because the
international criminal court has an open
investigation into crimes committed in
the territory of Palestine so I would
call for all of these crimes to be
properly investigated and the
perpetrators to B to be brought to
individual criminal accountability
that's what we have to see sorry and
you're not of course you're not the only
one calling for that and there has to
and there has to be accountability later
but now what needs to happen to get Aid
into Gaza for those 1 8 million people
who are depending on
it it's actually very simple there's a
crossing point called Kum shalom it's in
the south of Gaza between Israel and
Gaza itself it's like a port with lane
lane after Lane like you know you get
coming through major ports it's possible
to get hundreds and hundreds of trucks
through Kum Shalom every day before this
war not through Karam Shalom but unra
was bringing in 500 trucks a day in
order to deal with the sheer magnitude
of what we're now seeing in Gaza we need
to open up Karam Shalom and have a
massive injection of Aid into Gaza only
that I think will avoid who can force
what is already who can force who can
force Israel to open up that
Crossing well it's clearly the Americans
um because it's the Americans who are
frankly supplying billions of dollars in
economic and military aid to to Israel
and just a few days ago we had Mr
blinken saying that Israel has to meet
its obligations under International
humanitarian law and that involves
protecting occupied people because
Israel controls the lanan air borders
that gives Israel effective control
which means that it is an occupying
force and an occupier has specific
obligations under the Geneva conventions
to protect occupied populations so the
whole the Kum Shalom needs to be opened
up and Gaza needs to be flooded with
food with water with fuel there's a
massive need for Aid and that must be
met because if it isn't we're going to
start seeing huge numbers of deaths
caused by the kind you know watery
diarrhea that can become a killer and
that is what the people of Gaza are
facing yeah on top of the more than
15,500 Palestinians who've already been
killed since you were talking about
accountability what we are seeing happen
in the trip we have seen for the past 15
years during conflicts there which you
have lived through do you think that if
Israel had been held to account in the
past for things that it's doing now that
we would be in a situation that we're in
now what I would say is that if there
had been proper accountability let's
suppose a situation in which there were
arrest warrants put out for Mr Netanyahu
for example the Israeli defense minister
if Israel knew that further demonization
which there has already been an actual
criminal accountability held against
their leaders I think there would be
different sorts of decision making and
it may be I'm not saying definitely it
may be that had there been proper
criminal accountability against people
on both sides then perhaps this conflict
would have gone in a different direction
people have to know that this whole sale
industrial scale Slaughter that's going
on has a price tag and that price is
criminal accountability it's happened in
Yugoslavia for example bovich and
karajic and madich the bosan servs and
president of Serbia when it became
politically expedient for Serbia to hand
over mosovich he was no use politically
to them he was handed over to the he who
knows what Mr netanyahu's future is
perhaps one day he'll become politically
dispensable and perhaps he will have a
different fate perhaps he too might end
up in the ha to face accountability and
Mr ganis again for now for the immediate
future of those 1.8 million and
Palestinians and Gaza who are displaced
you have said in the past that
Palestinians that they are truly the
dispossessed of the Earth how concerned
are you that they will be able to return
to their
homes you know it's a great concern I've
been speaking to people in Gaza remember
these are refugees who were made
refugees in
1948 then in ' 67 they saw the
occupation begin and then from 2007 they
saw the blockade so there are three
levels of catastrophe and crisis that
we're seeing and what we know from what
we've seen since the 7th of October is
that there are very few constraints
against Israel and what we're seeing as
by the way Israeli ministers have called
for
um another Napa in Gaza and I fear that
that is what is being perpetrated today
just lastly Mr Gunners we've spoken
about how to get that much needed Aid
into Gaza but what about the bombing how
do we get the bombing to stop is it also
solely up to the US now to put real
pressure on
Israel yes I mean the last time this
really happened was under James Baker US
seu state um you know many decades ago
where he made it clear that there were
going to be Financial penalties and my
concern is that unless America is
prepared to talk about serious economic
and diplomatic
repercussions for what Israel is doing
today the widespread disregard for
international humanitarian law then I
think this kind of bombing is going to
continue and an additional concern is
what we're going to see is refugees in
huge numbers being pushed into the Sinai
the effective um ethnic cleansing which
is why I also think that there's been
some discussion around un circles I'm
not saying in the UN of some kind of
protective presence to make sure that
we're not seeing Mass Force displacement
which is a crime it's an international
crime and we have to make sure that that
does not happen because as I say truly
they are the dispossessed of the earth
and they must not see further
dispossession Mr gunnis it is great to
get your insights on the story we really
appreciate it that is the former
spokesman for anra the un's Palestinian
refugee agency Chris gunnis live in
London